tidbcloud/premium: add create private endpoint (#21923)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/premium/connect-via-private-connection-premium.md

> ---

Reviewer: Please update the filename to: `connect-to-premium-via-aws-private-endpoint.md`

title: Connect to a TiDB Cloud Premium instance via AWS PrivateLink
summary: Learn how to connect to your TiDB Cloud Premium instance via private endpoint with AWS.
---

# Connect to a TiDB Cloud Premium instance via AWS PrivateLink

This document describes how to connect to your TiDB Cloud Premium instance via [AWS PrivateLink](https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink).

> **Tip:**
>
> - To learn how to connect to a {{{ .starter }}} cluster via AWS PrivateLink, see [Connect to {{{ .starter }}} via AWS PrivateLink](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections-serverless.md).

> > - To learn how to connect to a TiDB Cloud Premium instance via private endpoint with Alibaba Cloud, see [Connect to a TiDB Cloud Premium instance via Alibaba Cloud Private Link](/tidb-cloud/connect-via-private-connection-premium-on-alicloud.md).

Reviewer: - Keep wording about Essential.
- Remove wording about Alibaba Cloud for now to avoid blocking this PR.
```suggestion
> To learn how to connect to a {{{ .starter }}} or {{{ .essential }}} cluster via AWS PrivateLink, see [Connect to {{{ .starter }}} or Essential via AWS PrivateLink](/tidb-cloud/set-up-private-endpoint-connections-serverless.md).
```

    The **Create endpoint** page is displayed.

    ![Verify endpoint service](/media/tidb-cloud/private-endpoint/create-endpoint-2.png)

3. In the **Endpoint settings** area, fill in a name tag if needed, and then select the **Endpoint services that use NLBs and GWLBs** option.
4. In the **Service settings** area, enter the service name `${your_endpoint_service_name}` from the generated command (`--service-name ${your_endpoint_service_name}`).
5. Click **Verify service**.
6. In the **Network settings** area, select your VPC in the drop-down list.
7. In the **Subnets** area, select the availability zones where your TiDB instance is located.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If your service is spanning across more than three availability zones (AZs), you might not be able to select AZs in the **Subnets** area. This issue occurs when there is an extra AZ in your selected region in addition to the AZs where your TiDB instance is located. In this case, contact [PingCAP Technical Support](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/tidb-cloud-support).

8. In the **Security groups** area, select your security group properly.

    > **Note:**
    >

>     > Make sure the selected security group allows inbound access from your EC2 instances on Port 4000 or a customer-defined port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > Make sure the selected security group allows inbound access from your EC2 instances on Port `4000` or a customer-defined port.
```
